.Dd May 8, 2026
.Dt LLMCTRLX 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm llmctrlx
.Nd local LLM orchestration and execution CLI with tool and plugin support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Ar command
.Op options
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a local LLM orchestration and execution CLI built with Node.js.
It features persistent chat history, support for multiple chat sessions,
LLM tool execution, model management, benchmarking, and shell command analysis.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width LLMCTRLX_MAX_UPLOAD_FILE_SIZE
.It Ev LLMCTRLX_API_URL
The URL of your LLM provider.
Default is provider-specific.
.It Ev LLMCTRLX_MODEL
The default model to use.
Default:
.Li gemma4:e2b .
.It Ev LLMCTRLX_HISTORY_FILE
The default history file.
Default:
.Pa ~/.llmctrlx_history.json .
Use
.Li NUL
on Windows or
.Pa /dev/null
on Linux/macOS to disable history.
.It Ev LLMCTRLX_TOOLS_DIR
The tools directory to load tools from.
No tools are loaded by default.
Set this to
.Pa /usr/local/share/llmctrlx/tools
(DEB/RPM/Homebrew installs) or a custom path to opt-in.
.It Ev LLMCTRLX_PLUGINS_DIR
The plugins directory to load plugins from.
No plugins are loaded by default.
Set this to
.Pa /usr/local/share/llmctrlx/plugins
(DEB/RPM/Homebrew installs) or a custom path to opt-in.
The CLI flag
.Fl X
takes precedence over this variable.
.It Ev __LLMCTRLX_OLLAMA_API_KEY
API key for the Ollama cloud provider.
Default: empty string.
.It Ev __LLMCTRLX_OPENAI_API_KEY
API key for the OpenAI provider.
Default: empty string.
.It Ev LLMCTRLX_PROVIDER
The default provider.
Default:
.Li ollama .
Options:
.Li ollama ,
.Li lmstudio ,
.Li openai .
.It Ev LLMCTRLX_MAX_UPLOAD_FILE_SIZE
Maximum file size to upload.
Default: 10 MB (1024 * 1024 * 10).
.It Ev LLMCTRLX_SESSION
The default session name.
Default:
.Li default .
.It Ev LLMCTRLX_NUM_CTX
The default context window size.
Default:
.Li 32768 .
.It Ev LLMCTRLX_TIMEOUT
The default request timeout in seconds.
Default:
.Li 480 .
.El
.Sh PLUGINS
.Nm
supports dynamic plugins to extend its functionality.
.Sy Plugins are opt-in \(em none are loaded by default .
.Pp
To enable plugins, set the
.Ev LLMCTRLX_PLUGINS_DIR
environment variable or pass the
.Fl X
flag:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Permanently via environment variable
export LLMCTRLX_PLUGINS_DIR="/usr/local/share/llmctrlx/plugins"

# Or per-invocation
llmctrlx chat -X /usr/local/share/llmctrlx/plugins -u "hello"
.Ed
.Pp
System-wide DEB/RPM/Homebrew installations include a collection of plugins in
.Pa /usr/local/share/llmctrlx/plugins .
You can copy only the plugins you want into a local directory:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mkdir -p ~/.llmctrlx_plugins
cp /usr/local/share/llmctrlx/plugins/logger.plugin.js ~/.llmctrlx_plugins/
cp /usr/local/share/llmctrlx/plugins/prompt-guard.plugin.js ~/.llmctrlx_plugins/
export LLMCTRLX_PLUGINS_DIR="~/.llmctrlx_plugins"
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Pa logger.plugin.js
and
.Pa prompt-guard.plugin.js
plugins are great to start off with.
.Pp
To explicitly disable plugins even when
.Ev LLMCTRLX_PLUGINS_DIR
is set, use
.Fl x .
The flags
.Fl x
and
.Fl X
are mutually exclusive.
.Sh TOOLS
.Nm
supports LLM tool execution but loads
.Sy no tools by default
\(em the engine starts blank.
This prevents unwanted tools from consuming tokens on every request.
.Pp
System-wide DEB/RPM/Homebrew installations include a collection of tools in
.Pa /usr/local/share/llmctrlx/tools .
.Pp
To use the bundled tools, point
.Nm
at that directory via
.Ev LLMCTRLX_TOOLS_DIR
or the
.Fl T
flag:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Permanently via environment variable
export LLMCTRLX_TOOLS_DIR="/usr/local/share/llmctrlx/tools"

# Or per-invocation
llmctrlx chat -T /usr/local/share/llmctrlx/tools -u "What time is it?"
.Ed
.Pp
You can also create your own tools folder and copy only what you need:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mkdir -p ~/my-tools
cp /usr/local/share/llmctrlx/tools/datetime.js ~/my-tools/
llmctrlx chat -T ~/my-tools -u "What time is it?"
.Ed
.Sh GLOBAL OPTIONS
These options apply to most commands:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl a , -api_url Ar url
The URL of your LLM provider.
Default:
.Li http://127.0.0.1:11434 .
.It Fl m , -model Ar name
Model to use.
Default:
.Li gemma4:e2b .
.It Fl P , -provider Ar provider
Set the provider.
Default:
.Li ollama .
Options:
.Li ollama ,
.Li lmstudio ,
.Li openai .
.It Fl K , -api_key Ar key
Set the API key for the cloud Ollama or OpenAI instance.
.It Fl k , -session Ar name
Session key for continuing a conversation.
Default:
.Li default .
.It Fl X , -plugins_dir Ar path
Path to the plugins directory to load plugins from.
Overrides
.Ev LLMCTRLX_PLUGINS_DIR .
No plugins are loaded if neither is set.
.It Fl x , -no_plugins
Disable plugin loading entirely, even if
.Ev LLMCTRLX_PLUGINS_DIR
is set.
Mutually exclusive with
.Fl X .
.It Fl o , -timeout Ar seconds
Request timeout in seconds.
Default:
.Li 480 .
.El
.Sh COMMANDS
.Ss chat
Run a chat session with an LLM.
Maintains conversational history in
.Pa .chat_history.json
and supports tool usage.
Tools do not execute when
.Fl -stream
is used; only the tool call is generated.
.Pp
Options:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl u , -user Ar text
The user prompt. Can be combined with
.Fl -stdin .
.It Fl s , -system Ar text
A system prompt to prepend.
.It Fl f , -files Ar path
Attach files to the prompt. Can be specified multiple times.
.It Fl k , -session Ar name
Session key.
Default:
.Li default .
.It Fl c , -context-length Ar number
Number of messages to include in conversation history.
Default:
.Li 5 .
.It Fl -stdin
Read content from stdin. Can be combined with
.Fl u .
.It Fl -json
Force JSON output.
.It Fl -stream
Stream output as it is generated.
.It Fl t , -temperature Ar float
Set the generation temperature.
.It Fl p , -top_p Ar float
Set the top-p sampling value.
.It Fl T , -tools-dir Ar path
Path to the tools directory.
Default:
.Li ./tools .
.It Fl W , -no-tools
Disable tool usage.
.It Fl g , -tags Ar tags
Comma-separated list of tags to filter loaded tools.
.It Fl R , -record Ar file
Record the session to a JSON file for later replay.
.El
.Pp
The
.Cm chat
command automatically loads JavaScript modules from the
.Li ./tools
directory.
When tags are specified via
.Fl -tags ,
only tools matching those tags (or tools with the
.Li always
tag) are loaded.
.Pp
Examples:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
llmctrlx chat -u "Why is the sky blue?"
llmctrlx chat -u "Tell me a joke." -W -m gemma4:e2b
llmctrlx chat -u "What time is it?" -m gemma4:e2b
llmctrlx chat -u "What time is it?" -T "~/my-tools" -m gemma4:e2b
llmctrlx chat -u "Check my IP" --tags network -m gemma4:e2b
cat examples/prompt.txt | llmctrlx chat -s 'You are a helpful assistant'
cat Makefile | llmctrlx chat -u "examine my Makefile" --stdin
llmctrlx chat -u "Summarize these files." -f file1.txt -f file2.txt
llmctrlx chat -u "What is this image of?" -f img.png -m gemma4:26b
.Ed
.Ss model
Manage LLM models.
.Pp
Options:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl -list
List all local models.
.It Fl -show
Show details for a specific model (requires
.Fl m ) .
.It Fl -pull
Pull a model (requires
.Fl m ) .
.It Fl -delete
Delete a model (requires
.Fl m ) .
.El
.Pp
Examples:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
llmctrlx model --list
llmctrlx model --pull -m llama3
llmctrlx model --show -m llama3
llmctrlx model --delete -m llama3
.Ed
.Ss embed
Generate embeddings for files.
.Pp
Options:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl f , -files Ar path
File(s) to generate embeddings for. Required.
.El
.Pp
Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
llmctrlx embed -f README.md -m mistral:latest
.Ed
.Ss bench
Benchmark one or multiple models to compare speed (response time and token count).
.Pp
Options:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl m , -model Ar names
Comma-separated list of models to benchmark. Required.
.It Fl u , -user Ar text
The prompt to test with.
Default:
.Li Hello .
.El
.Pp
Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
llmctrlx bench -m llama3,gemma:7b,mistral -u "Write a short poem."
.Ed
.Ss run
Execute a shell command and pass its standard output to an LLM for analysis.
.Pp
Options:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl u , -user Ar command
The shell command to execute. Required.
.It Fl R , -record Ar file
Record the session to a JSON file for later replay.
.El
.Pp
Examples:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
llmctrlx run -u "df -h" -m llama3
llmctrlx run -u "ls -la" -m llama3
.Ed
.Ss replay
Replay a recorded session from a JSON file.
Supports simple playback and a diff mode that re-executes the original command
and compares results.
.Pp
Options:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl -diff
Re-execute the original command with the recorded inputs and show a diff
against the recording.
Exit code is
.Li 0
if identical, or
.Li 2
if differences were found.
.El
.Pp
Examples:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
llmctrlx replay session.json
llmctrlx replay session.json --diff
.Ed
.Ss plan
Execute a YAML-defined multi-step workflow.
Runs each step command in order, captures stdout/stderr, and analyzes the
combined output with an LLM.
Plans may include reusable variables via a top-level
.Li vars:
mapping, overridable on the command line.
A
.Li policy:
section may restrict which models and tools are allowed.
.Pp
Options:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl m , -model Ar name
Model to use, or override the plan's configured model.
.It Fl s , -system Ar text
Optional system prompt to override the plan's system prompt.
.It Fl -var Ar key=value
Set or override a plan variable; can be repeated.
.It Fl R , -record Ar file
Record the plan execution to a JSON file for later replay.
.It Fl -dry-run
Show the ordered steps without executing any commands.
.El
.Pp
Examples:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
llmctrlx plan examples/plans/host-health.yaml
llmctrlx plan examples/plans/host-health.yaml -m llama3
llmctrlx plan examples/plans/host-health.yaml --dry-run
llmctrlx plan examples/plans/host-health.yaml --var server=proxmox1 --var env=prod
.Ed
.Ss tools
List and inspect available LLM tools.
.Pp
Options:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl g , -tags Ar tags
Filter displayed tools by tags.
Tools with the
.Li always
tag are always included.
.It Fl -json
Output tools in JSON format.
.El
.Pp
Examples:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
llmctrlx tools
llmctrlx tools --tags network,web
.Ed
.Ss history
Manage chat history across all sessions.
.Pp
Options:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl -show
Show the current chat history (default when no other option is provided).
.It Fl -all
Show all chat history entries.
.It Fl -list
List session keys.
.El
.Pp
Examples:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
llmctrlx history
llmctrlx history --all
llmctrlx history --list
llmctrlx history --show -k my-session
.Ed
.Ss completion
Generate shell completion scripts for bash, zsh, and fish.
.Pp
Options:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl -shell Ar shell
Shell type to generate completion for.
Options:
.Li bash ,
.Li zsh ,
.Li fish .
Defaults to the current shell if not specified.
.El
.Pp
Examples:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
llmctrlx completion --shell bash
llmctrlx completion --shell zsh
llmctrlx completion --shell fish
.Ed
.Sh SHELL COMPLETIONS
.Nm
supports auto-completion for bash, zsh, and fish shells.
.Ss Automatic Installation
.Bd -literal -offset indent
node install-completion.ts
node install-completion.ts bash
node install-completion.ts zsh
node install-completion.ts fish
.Ed
.Ss Manual Installation
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# bash
llmctrlx completion --shell bash > /usr/local/etc/bash_completion.d/llmctrlx

# zsh
llmctrlx completion --shell zsh > /usr/local/share/zsh/site-functions/_llmctrlx

# fish
llmctrlx completion --shell fish > ~/.config/fish/completions/llmctrlx.fish
.Ed

.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
When used with
.Cm replay Fl -diff ,
exits with
.Li 2
if differences are found between the recorded and replayed session.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ollama 1
.Sh AUTHORS
See the project repository for contributor information.
